{% include navigation.html %}

# Unit 5 Notes

## 5.1

* Computing innovations are created by people
* Methods change with time, and new computing innovations are created
* Some innovations happen randomly and unexpectedly
* Effects can be +/- to different people
* Advancements in computing have lead to creativity in other fields (medicine, engineering, communications, and arts)
* Computing innovations can work in ways unintended by the creators

  * It is not possible for a programmer to prepare for all the ways a computing innovation is used
* Rapid sharing of a program can result in unintended uses of a program


Actions:

1. Three beneficial effects of computing is efficiency in actions from computing, automation so humans do not have make the computations, and accuracy (human errors are avoided). 3 harmful effects are that people typically use computers too often and this leads to vision issues, mental issues, and poor sitting posture
2. Dopamine issues are real, people spend so much time on video games/social media that their brains are likely chemically altered so they only feel pleasure from playing VALORANT and snapping their best friends.

## 5.2

* **Digital Divide** - differing access to computing devices & the Internet
  * Several issues that arise
* Internet access varies b/w socioeconomic, geographic, and demographic characteristics
* Raises equity issues both globally & locally
* Affected by the actions from individuals, orgs, and gov'ts

Actions:

1. People can empower themselves in the digital world by studying and getting a job to purchase a digital device
2. Someone can help someone that is not empowered by teaching them topics. For example, I taught refugee children in City Heights about computer basics and how to stay safe online
3. Paper may be blocking digital empowerment, but I do not think these barriers exist at DNHS. Del Norte has plenty of chrome books, computers, and all classrooms are equipped with a desktop & projector. Other less fortunate places/schools may suffer from these barriers.



## 5.3

* Computing Innovations contain bias
  * Bias is written into algorithms, or bias can be in the data used
  * Programmers should do their best to reduce bias in their programs
  * Combatting human bias that is embedded at all levels of software development

Actions:

1. I do not think the creator of the program intended the camera to be "racist", but it was an unfortunate error due to the programs code. 
2. This could have happened because the program was coded to detect movement of a circular face, but since the man was so dark the camera would not detect his movement
3. It is harmful as people will feel offended by the camera and company's mistakes
4. Yes, of course it should be corrected in the future
5. To produce a better outcome, I will make sure to test all my code/programs so it cannot be judged as "racist"

## 5.4

* People participate in problem-solving processes on several scales
* Widespread access to info facilitates identification of solutions, dev. of solutions, and dissemination of results
* Science has been distributed in similar ways
* **Crowdsourcing** - the practice of obtaining input/info from a large # of people on the internet
  * Human capabilities are enhanced by collaboration via computing
  * Offers new models for collaboration, such as connecting businesses or social causes (GoFundMe)

Actions:

1. A possible crowdsourcing idea is something similar to the AP stats  projects where a person will go around a classroom asking all 150 CS students about a question, and documenting the answers the questions.
2. DNHS crowdsourcing. Send out a link to a program to the whole school, and ask for feedback. Feedback from the school will be helpful because there will be many perspectives on the program rather than yourself.



## 5.5

* Use of computing can raise legal and ethical concerns
* Material created on a computer is the intellectual property of that creator
* Must cite authors in program to provide credit
* **Creative Commons** - A public copyright license that enables the free distribution of an otherwise copyrighted work
* **MIT License** - Code is free to use and closed source versions
* **Open Source GPL License** - People can do whatever they want, except distributing closed source versions

Actions:

1. Our group chose an MIT license because we want to allow the general public to freely use/distribute our program. We do not intend to monetize any part of our project, and I do not want to charge people for the use of my sleep tracker either.



## 5.6

* Several privacy risks from collecting and storing personal data
* **Personally Identifiable Information (PII)** - Info on an individual that identifies, links, relates, or describes them
* Search Engines can record and maintain history of users
* Websites record even more information
* PII can be used in malicious ways, safe computing ensures this does not happen

Actions:

1. Some PII I have seen in projects are names, emails, class periods, grades, etc.
2. I think it is good to share some information on users, but there is certain information that is supposed to be kept secret
3. Good pass: long, contains several types of characters (a-z, A-Z, 0-9, !#$). Bad pass: short passwords with dictionary words (ex: password)
4. Symmetrical encryption: one key to both decrypt and encrypt information. Asymmetrical encryption: a pair of keys, public and private to encrypt and decrypt messages.
5. Example of encryption used in deployment is asymmetrical encryption in using SSH keys to connect to AWS, as well as HTTPS on our Nginx server.
6. I have luckily never been the victim of a phishing scheme, however, I do get texts from scamming drug dealers on the daily. I hope "James" from US pharmacy is doing well but I will not fall for his scams. I also see the emails directed towards seniors but I do not have a 401k yet so it doesn't apply! Can't fall for those either. Suckers. 
